PepsiCo Earnings: What To Expect From PEP Stock
Pepsi needs to stop the bleeding in North American Beverage sales.

By Wayne Duggan
|
July 9, 2018, at 7:05 a.m.

Save




More
U.S. News & World Report
What To Expect From PepsiCo Earnings

More
PepsiCo says it’s dropping aspartame from Diet Pepsi in response to customer feedback and replacing it with sucralose, another artificial sweetener commonly known as Splenda. The decision to swap sweeteners comes as Americans keep turning away from popular diet sodas. Coca-Cola said this week of April 20, 2015, that sales volume for Diet Coke fell 5 percent in North America in the first three months of the year.
Analysts are expecting a soft second quarter for Pepsi stock.PAUL SAKUMA/AP

PepsiCo, Inc. (Nasdaq: PEP) has been pulling out all the stops to navigate a difficult environment in recent years, and analysts are expecting another difficult quarter when the company reports earnings on July 10. However, expectations may be appropriately low at this point, and Pepsi could get its business headed back in the right direction in the second half of 2018.

Consensus Wall Street forecasts are calling for Pepsi to report second-quarter earnings per share of $1.52. Analysts are also expecting revenue of $16.08 billion, up 2.3 percent from a year ago.

[See: 52 Elite Dividend Stocks With Unreal Track Records.]

Bank of America analyst Bryan Spillane is expecting a mostly in-line quarter from Pepsi but says business may start picking up starting in the third quarter.

“Management set expectations for a soft 2Q given the timing of investments,” Spillane says. “Sequential improvement in North America Beverages heading into summer is a key catalyst for the stock.”

Last quarter, Pepsi reported a North America volume sales decline of 3 percent and organic revenue decline of 2 percent. Pepsi has been raising prices and relying on its Frito-Lay snack business to offset weakness, but the market hasn’t been impressed. PEP stock is down 4.8 percent in the past year.

Gross margin also declined 1.1 percent in the first quarter to 54.9 percent. Pepsi said rising commodity prices were to blame for the drop, a trend which likely continued in the second quarter.

Spillane is calling for full-year 2018 EPS of $5.60 from Pepsi, just shy of the company’s $5.70 guidance. After a recent meeting with management, Spillane says product and marketing initiatives for Mountain Dew and Gatorade are already showing signs of improving North American sales.

CFRA analyst Joseph Agnese says Pepsi’s North American business could turn the corner in the second quarter.