PepsiCo plans layoffs, plant closures in overhaul
Published: Feb. 15, 2019 at 8:37 a.m. ET
By Allison Prang
1
Email icon
Facebook icon
Twitter icon
Linkedin icon
Flipboard icon
Print icon
Resize icon
PepsiCo Inc. plans to shed jobs and close plants over the next few years as part of a new restructuring program, as Chief Executive Ramon Laguarta looks to make his imprint on the food and beverage company.

The Purchase, N.Y., firm said Friday it expects to incur about $2.5 billion in pretax charges through 2023 from the program, designed to "leverage new technology and business models." The company's 2018 results included $138 million of restructuring costs, and it expects to incur $800 million in the current year.

The maker of Mountain Dew, Quaker Oats oatmeal and Tropicana orange juice also said it expects organic revenue -- which excludes currency fluctuations, acquisitions and divestitures -- to rise 4% this year, compared with 3.7% in the recently ended year. Core earnings are expected to fall by about 3%, driven by items including a higher tax rate and investments being made this year.

Shares of PepsiCo rose 1.3% in premarket trading after the company said revenue was flat from a year earlier though it benefited from higher prices in its North America units. Because of higher transportation costs, the beverage maker had planned to raise prices on some of its Frito-Lay products in October.

Mr. Laguarta, who took over as CEO from Indra Nooyi in October, has been working to focus the company on priorities including accelerating organic revenue growth and managing costs and using the resulting savings to reinvest in the business. To push sales growth, PepsiCo has looked at increasing advertising, broadening product lines and making changes to packaging.

Earlier this week, Coca-Cola Co. said it expects sales to slow in 2019. In the latest quarter, Coca-Cola said tea and coffee sales volume rose while soda sales volume fell. Shares in the company fell 8.4% to $45.59 on Thursday.

NOW PLAYING: 
Is Tesla Miles Ahead of Others in the Electric Vehicle Race?




Visit our Video Center
PepsiCo said revenue was $19.52 billion in the fourth quarter, in line with estimates from analysts polled by Refinitiv. Organic revenue rose 4.6%.

Among PepsiCo segments, Frito-Lay North America saw the biggest increase in the quarter, with revenue climbing 3.6%. Revenue rose 1.8% in the company's North American beverages division.

PepsiCo reported a fourth-quarter profit of $6.85 billion, or $4.83 a share, which included a $4.93 billion income-tax benefit. For the comparable quarter a year prior, the company posted a loss of $710 million, or 50 cents a share.

Excluding one-time items, earnings were $1.49 a share, which met analysts' estimates.