PepsiCo's CEO Earned Breathing Room in 2012. Q4 Profit Rises 17%
Abram BrownFormer Staff

PepsiCo reported better-than-expected quarterly figures that will continue to relieve some pressure on the world's largest snack-food maker and its chief executive.

Net income rose to $1.7 billion, $1.06 a share, from $1.4 billion, 89 cents a share, a year ago. Excluding one-time items, Pepsi earned $1.09 a share. Analysts had expected $1.05 a share.

Pepsi offered a full-year profit forecast that matched Wall Street projections. It sees earnings per share rising 7% to roughly $4.30 a share.


Today's report marks a little more than a year since CEO Indra Nooyi outlined transition plans to trim costs and reinvest in the company's core brands. Pepsi increased marketing efforts for its flagship products, goods like Frito-Lay, Gatorade, Quaker and its namesake cola.

For the year, Pepsi earned $6.5 billion on $65.5 billion in sales. While a drop from a year earlier, Pepsi had warned investors to expect the turnaround plans to dampen these figures. And still, since making the announcement, Pepsi shares outperformed chief rival Coca-Cola by 2 percentage points (11.8% versus 9.5%, respectively). Pepsi also competes with packaged-food companies like Mondelez International, Kellogg and General Mills.

That Nooyi's plans are already seeming to boost Pepsi stock should tamp down calls for her to step down. Nooyi, the 56-year-old who ranked No. 12 on Forbes' most recent Power Women roll, had taken a great deal of criticism for focusing on healthy products that took attention away from Pepsi's older brands. The goals she laid out last year were a direct response to that, and she's earned some breathing room. Provided, of course, that Pepsi continues at this clip.

Pepsi shares in early morning trading rose 1.5% to $72.65.

Revenue fell 1% to $20 billion, partly weakened by currency problems from a stronger dollar. Yet, the sales figures still managed to beat analyst forecasts of $19.8 billion.